---
layout: post
title: Elements
---

The FHIR [`Element` definition](https://hl7-fhir.github.io/element.html) lists only `id` and `extension` values. However, as we've previously established, a FHIR element is a key/value pair, and has optional `id` and `extension` values.

Given that definition, the design of `Element` falls pretty cleanly into place. I've modeled `Element` as follows:

```rust
pub struct Element {
	pub name: String,
	pub value: ElementType
	pub id: Option<String>,
	pub extensions: Option<Vec<Extension>>
}
```

Even if you don't grok Rust, this is pretty straightforward: we've defined `Element` as a `struct` with four fields. The first, `name` is a string (for various reasons, we might change that definition to a reference value at some point). At this point, `name` could be any Unicode value; if I want to be perfectly pedantic, I might at some point define a Rust type to encapsulate a lowercase ASCII string (assuming `name` is so constrained -- this is not clearly documented yet).

The [`Option` type](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Option_type) is the Rust idiom for values that might not have a value. Unlike traditional `null` or `nil` values (but like C# nullables), Rust generally makes you consider the `None` case explicitly, avoiding the dreaded "Null Pointer Exception".

As we previously discovered, the `value` of an `Element` is either a primitive atomic value, or a sub-elements bag of `Element`. (Bag because due to element cardinality, an `Element` can contain multiples of the same sub-element, and because FHIR does not enforce ordering, although some representations of FHIR may).

Again, this definition translates nicely into a type declaration for `ElementType`:

```rust
pub enum ElementType {
	Atom(Primitive),
	Elt(Vec<Element>)
}
```

Again, a little explanation: a Rust `enum` is a [tagged union type](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tagged_union). This just represents our definition above: the value of an `Element` is either a `Primitive` valued `Atom`, or an `Elt` valued as a `Vec` (vector) of `Element`s. As an implementation detail, the Rust `Vec` type is ordered. This isn't a problem, as FHIR doesn't prohibit ordering, but if I implement equality checking, I need to do so in an order-free way.

We still need to define what `Primitive` and `Extension` are (and the latter is almost, but not quite, an `Element`), but what's neat about this definition is that with appropriate serialization and deserialization,we almost have a functional, if not terribly developer friendly, implementation. I say almost because there's a minor detail we'll have to deal with when it comes to JSON serialization: we need to consider the defined, not just the actual, cardinality of sub-elements. More about that later.

For instance, simple printing of an element (to a non-standard serialization) can be recursively defined (without dealing, for now, with `id`s and `extension`s):

```rust
impl Element {
	pub fn to_string(&self) -> String {
		self.recursive_to_string(0)
	}

	fn recursive_to_string(&self,level: usize) -> String {
		fn recursive_elt_vec_to_string (v: &Vec<Element>, level: usize) -> String {
			v.iter().map(|e| e.recursive_to_string(level)).collect::<Vec<String>>().connect("\n")
		}

		let spaces: String = repeat("  ").take(level).collect::<Vec<&str>>().concat();

		let label = format!("{}: ",self.name);

		let value = match self.value {
 			ElementType::Atom(ref v) => format!("{}",v),
 			ElementType::Elt(ref v) => format!("\n{}",recursive_elt_vec_to_string(v, level + 1))			
		};
		format!("{}{}{}", spaces, label, value)
	}
}
```

Next we will deal with primitives, so that code will work, and we'll pause to consider what we've learned so far.