---
layout: post
title: Implementing IDs
---

We keep changing our definition of `Element`s based on learning more about the structure of FHIR. As we implement `id` and `extension`, we'll have to change our definition yet again.

The issue here is that these values can be attached to any value. `Resource`? Yep. `Primitive` values? Yep. Lists of `Primitive` values? An `id` or `extension` can be attached to *any* of the primitive values in the list.

When we move to JSON serialization, this leads to some awkward constructs. Early on in FHIR, this proliferation of `id` and `extension` meant that all values were JSON objects, with a `value` key. That is, even a simple boolean was serialized thus:

```json
{"bool_value": {"value": true}}
```

to make room for possible `id` and `extension` values:

```json
{"bool_value": {"value": true, "id": "foo"}}
```

That's a bit of overhead for the unlikely event of extending a primitive value.

To get around this, FHIR now places `id` and `extension` in a shadow key:

```json
{
"bool_value": {"value": true},
"_bool_value": {"id": "foo"}
}
```

When an `Element` has a list of values (which map to a JSON key with an array of values), the shadow key is a parallel array, whose `i`th index contains the `id`/`extension` object for the `i`th value in the list. If there is no `id` or `extension` for that value, the `i`th index contains the JSON `null` (the only time that FHIR uses `null`s in serialization).

```json
{
"bool_list_value": [true, false],
"_bool_list_value": [null, {"id": "foo"}]
}
```

If the `Element` value is sub-`Element` valued, `id` and `extension` are treated the same way. At least I *think* so based on the statement "Composites can have id attributes, which are converted to JSON member values, in the same manner as described for primitives", although that could *alternatively* mean that `id` is treated as a sub-element value. I'm going for consistency unless otherwise directed:

```json
{
"foo": {"bar": true, "baz": false},
"_foo": {"id": "quux"}
}
```

However, the `id` and `extension` proliferation affects our internal representation. The *right* way to describe the FHIR representation is:

An element is a key/value pair, whose value is either a list of values or an actual value, where an actual value is either a primitive value or a set of sub-elements, and where primitive or sub-element list values can optionally contain an `id` and a list of `extension`s.

This translates into an Algebraic Data Type as a nasty set of `enum` and `Value` `struct`s with two nested `value` fields.


```rust
pub struct Element {
	name: String,
	value: EltValueType
}
pub enum EltValueType {
	List(Vec<Value>),
	Value
}
pub struct Value {
	value: ValueType,
	id: Option<String>,
	extension: Option<Vec<Extension>>
}
pub enum ValueType {
	Atom(Primitive),
	Elt(Vec<Element>)
}
```

Instead, I translated as follows:

```rust
pub struct Element {
	name: String,
	value: Value
}
pub struct Value {
	value: ValueType,
	id: Option<String>,
	extension: Option<Vec<Extension>>
}
pub enum ValueType {
	Atom(Primitive),
	List(Vec<Value>),
	Elt(Vec<Element>)
}
```

The downside of this representation is that the `id` and `extension` of a `List` `ValueType` is strictly speaking invalid and is ignored. The upside is that we don't have all the crazy union types (`enum`s). But again, the previous definition is *right* and maps the actual FHIR semantics.

Serializing this to JSON is relatively straightforward, but has about 30 lines of code dedicated to `id` epicycles, and we *still* haven't dealt with `extension`s.

By the way, `id` and `extension` are completely differently handled on `Resource` values, where they are plain old (although name reserved) values and serialized "properly" in JSON.

Here are the issues:

1. Except for `Resource`s, there are no FHIR specifications for what to do with `id`. There's no standardized FHIR programming model that requires `id` references, searching by `id`, etc.
2. It's not clear that you really need to extend `Primitive` types. Many folks are choosing to support `extension`s only on `Resource`s (that is, not even on `Complex` (aka "composite" or sub-`Element` valued `Element`s) types).

There's a strong case to be made for removing `id` entirely (except on `Resource`s, where they are the REST access key) and reserving `extension` either to `Resource`s only, or to `Resource`s and `Complex` values. Doing so would radically reduce the inherent complexity of the FHIR data model and the associated JSON serialization.